Defining a written language for Southern-Jutish (Sønderjysk/synnejysk)

By Kenneth Rohde Christiansen <kenneth@gnu.org>


Defining a writing system can be very difficult and there are a lot of factors 
to consider. In the following I have tried to summarize this.

WARNING: This is a lot of crap that needs to be seriously rewritten. Full of
bad English and typos. All help is appreciated, also by non-jutes who might 
have experience in this area.


Ideas:

o Make the writing system follow Standard-Danish as much as possible

	Pro: 
 	Makes it easier for non-jutes to read the litterature.

	Cons: 
	Might hide some characteristics that might later be lost.
	ex. Guld is pronounced like [Gul'] in sd. but like [Gul^j] in sj.
	lj and nj is used in Bornholms Ordbog, so that might be an advantage
	for using them.


o SJ has dialects, so it might be possible to use sideforms like in Norwegian 
  Nynorsk. This means that the main form is used in technical litterature, 
  school books etc, but the side forms can be used in romans, poetry, personal
  letters, etc.

	Pro: 
	Keeps the dialects alive. It is though, very important to keep the 
	numbers of side forms low.

	Cons:
	Too many forms, will make it hard for teachers to know the forms and 
	correct essays etc. This is a problem they have in Norway.

o Use extra chars for vocals

	Pro: 
	Danish has many vocals with more than one sounds. If no extra chars 
	are used it will be impossible for non-SJ people to know how to 
	pronounce the different ø's etc. It also makes it hard for SJ people
	to decide how to write a word without knowing the spelling by heart.

	Eks. how to spell "en ond mand" (an evil man)
	     Jæn ånd mand, or jæn ond mand?

	Cons:
	Using special letters makes it harder using the language on computers
	so the easiest way to using diacritics which means more key types, and
	harder writting the language on paper.

	It would be possible to use circumflex (^) or umlaub (") for creating 
	new letters.

	using more than one letter (digraphs) for sounds might also be 
	confusing. ex oae, oeu, etc.

	How to write palatalized l and n's are an other problem. Also what 
	about glottal stops. They are not the same place as in standard 
	Danish. Though they might confuse the writing system, and people
	dont need to be able to pronounce a language perfect in order to
 	know the spelling.



o Standard a common subset of SJ and it's close relative West-Jutish, so we 
  develop a written standard that is somewhat alike.

o Find common things in Norwegian, Swedish, Jamska, Skånsk, Trøndersk and 
  integrate these well.

o Find old Jutish texts and see if we should build on the traditions. The
  texts seem very old and the language changed a lot. These are some 
  resources from the 1800-1900, but the spelling seem pretty inconsistent
  (which is one of the things we want to prohibit)

o Collect detailed and not-detailed IPA of the words used in the different
  SJ dialects and in West Jutish. Compare and find general differences.
  This means it might be that in one dialect they use the o sounds the same
  places where another used å. This means that we can decide on using one
  char for the letter, and just tread the difference as dialectal.

o Look at what they did for Low Saxon in the Netherlands and Germany.
  Link: http://www.sassisch.net/rhahn/low-saxon/ls-ortho.html


It is probably an idea to start defining a spelling system for Jutish (leaving
out Regional Jutish (Standard Danish with Jutish loanwords - spoken a lot today)) and they defining the spelling system for Southern-Jutish on top of it.
